



MMUSIC                                                      P. Martinsen
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Zamfir
Intended status: Standards Track                                   Cisco
Expires: May 29, 2014                                  November 25, 2013


                Meta-data Attribute signaLling with ICE
                    draft-martinsen-mmusic-malice-01

Abstract

   Rewrite this as well??

   It can be useful for applications to provide flow metadata
   information to on-path devices to influence flow treatment in the
   network.  Provided that the network is able to provide useful
   feedback, this can also influence path selection if an application
   have multiple flow paths to choose from.

   This draft describes how this can be achieved by adding metadata to
   the STUN packets sent during the ICE connectivity checks or a
   slightly modified version of the keep-alive mechanism.  Devices on
   the media path can use the metadata information to prioritize the
   flow, perform traffic engineering, or provide network analytics and
   notifications as requested by the endpoints.  On-path devices can
   append or modify the existing metadata information in the STUN/ICE
   messages to enable feedback to other on-path devices or the
   applications in both ends of the media session.

   This document describes a framework mechanism for how such metadata
   can be transported by STUN when ICE is in use and it covers the
   endpoint and on path device processing.  The functionality described
   here is referred to as MALICE.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.







Martinsen & Zamfir        Expires May 29, 2014                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                   MALICE                    November 2013


   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 29, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     2.2.  Informational References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4

1.  Problem Statement

   In the context of Content, Mobile, Fixed Service, Service Providers,
   Enterprise and Private networks have a need to prioritize packet
   flows end-to-end.  These flows are often dynamic, time-bound,
   encrypted, peer-to-peer, possibly asymmetric, and might have
   different priorities depending on network conditions, direction, time
   of the day, dynamic user preferences and other factors.  These
   factors may be time variant, and thus need to be signalled.
   Moreover, in many cases of peer-to-peer communication, flow
   information is known only to the endpoint.  These considerations,
   coupled with the trend to use encryption for browser-to-browser
   communication [I-D.ietf-rtcweb-security-arch], imply that access



Martinsen & Zamfir        Expires May 29, 2014                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                   MALICE                    November 2013


   lists, deep packet inspection and other static prioritization methods
   cannot be employed successfully to prioritize packet flows.  It can
   also be useful for the endpoints to provide flow metadata and receive
   network feedback in order select an optimal media communication path.
   This specification describes how these problems can be solved at
   different points in the network by using either STUN [RFC5389]
   packets sent during ICE's [RFC5245] connectivity check phase during
   establishment of a media session, or as part a slightly modified
   keep-alive mechanism after the session is established.  Devices on
   the media path can use the metadata information to prioritize the
   flow, perform traffic engineering, or provide network analytics and
   notifications as requested by the endpoints.  On-path devices can
   append or modify the existing metadata information in the STUN/ICE
   messages.  The ICE agents may use this information to learn about the
   status of their requests at on-path devices.

   This document describes a framework mechanism for how such metadata
   can be transported by STUN when ICE is in use with UDP based media
   and it covers the endpoint and middlebox processing.  The
   functionality described here is referred to as MALICE.

2.  References

2.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4732]  Handley, M., Rescorla, E., IAB, "Internet Denial-of-
              Service Considerations", RFC 4732, December 2006.

   [RFC5389]  Rosenberg, J., Mahy, R., Matthews, P., and D. Wing,
              "Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN)", RFC 5389,
              October 2008.

   [RFC6398]  Le Faucheur, F., "IP Router Alert Considerations and
              Usage", BCP 168, RFC 6398, October 2011.

   [RFC5245]  Rosenberg, J., "Interactive Connectivity Establishment
              (ICE): A Protocol for Network Address Translator (NAT)
              Traversal for Offer/Answer Protocols", RFC 5245, April
              2010.









Martinsen & Zamfir        Expires May 29, 2014                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                   MALICE                    November 2013


2.2.  Informational References

   [I-D.ietf-rtcweb-security-arch]
              Rescorla, E., "WebRTC Security Architecture", draft-ietf-
              rtcweb-security-arch-07 (work in progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.muthu-behave-consent-freshness]
              Perumal, M., Wing, D., R, R., and T. Reddy, "STUN Usage
              for Consent Freshness", draft-muthu-behave-consent-
              freshness-04 (work in progress), July 2013.

Authors' Addresses

   Paal-Erik Martinsen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   Philip Pedersens vei 20
   Lysaker, Akershus  1366
   Norway

   Email: palmarti@cisco.com


   Anca Zamfir
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   EPFL, Quartier de l'Innovation
   Ecublens, Vaud  1015
   Switzerland

   Email: ancaz@cisco.com






















Martinsen & Zamfir        Expires May 29, 2014                  [Page 4]
